Document context refacto and modifications regarding symfony controllers (#1828)
PrestaShop/docs: modules/core-updates/9.0.md

### Symfony controllers

> In Symfony 6.4 the controllers must now be defined as services, the impact for the existing controllers is mainly around the concept od Dependency Injection and how services are injected or accessed in the controllers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Symfony 6.4, the controllers must now be defined as services. The impact on the existing controllers is mainly around the concept of Dependency Injection and how services are injected or accessed in the controllers.
```

> The container that is passed in the controllers is no longer the "global container" that contains all the existing services in the application, instead it injects a dedicated container optimized for the controller based on the services that are injected into it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The container passed to the controllers is no longer the "global container" that contains all the existing services in the application. Instead, it injects a dedicated container optimized for the controller based on the services that are injected into it.
```

> The problem is that most of our Symfony controllers don't rely on injection but use the `$this->get('service_name')` method to get any service, this is no longer possible in modern controllers because of the mentioned optimisation related to container build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The issue is that most of PrestaShop's Symfony controllers do not rely on injection but instead use the `$this->get('service_name')` method to access any service. This is no longer possible in modern controllers because of the mentioned optimization related to container build.
```

> To avoid a very big breaking change we modified the `PrestaShopBundle\Controller\Admin\FrameworkBundleAdminController` so that it is able to fetch services from the controller's container AND from the global one, but this is a little hack that goes against Symfony recommendations, as such this base class is already **deprecated** and will be removed in PrestaShop 10.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid a very big breaking change, we modified the `PrestaShopBundle\Controller\Admin\FrameworkBundleAdminController`, so that it can fetch services from the controller's container **and** from the global one, but this is a little hack that goes against Symfony recommendations, as such this base class is already **deprecated and will be removed in PrestaShop 10.0**.
```

> This gives developer some time to refacto their controller, they should now rely on the new `PrestaShopBundle\Controller\Admin\PrestaShopAdminController` which doesn't implement this hack in order to force a proper implementation of the controllers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This should give developers some time to refacto their controllers. They should now rely on the new `PrestaShopBundle\Controller\Admin\PrestaShopAdminController`, which doesn't implement the mentioned hack to force a proper implementation of the controllers.
```

You can read more details about <a href="https://symfony.com/doc/6.4/controller/service.html" target="_blank">Controllers as services</a>, <a href="https://symfony.com/doc/6.4/service_container/service_subscribers_locators.html" target="_blank">Service Subscribers & Locators</a> or <a href="https://symfony.com/doc/6.4/service_container.html">Service container</a> in general.

> As an example you have three main possibilities to injected a service into your controller:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, you have three main possibilities to inject a service into your controller:
```

```php
<?php

use PrestaShopBundle\Controller\Admin\PrestaShopAdminController;

> class MyController extends PrestaShopAdminController {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
class MyController extends PrestaShopAdminController
{
```

    /**
     * You can inject your service systematically in the constructor, useful if the service is used by several actions of your controller.
     * 
     * @param MyCustomService $myCustomService
     */
    public function __construct(
      private readonly MyCustomService $myCustomService,
    ) {
    }
    
    /**

>      * You can inject a service only on one method, useful if the service is used only in one action, it is more optimized than injecting it all the time and never use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     * You can inject a service only on one method, useful if the service is used only in one action. It is more optimized than injecting it all the time and never using it.
```

     * 
     * @param MySpecificService $specificService
     * @return JsonResponse
     */
    public function indexAction(MySpecificService $specificService): JsonResponse
    {
        $generalData = $this->myCustomerService->getData();
        $specificData = $specifiService->getSpecificData();

        // You can use the get method to fetch a service that was added in the getSubscribedServices method
        $toolingService = $this->container->get(ToolingService::class);
        
        return new JsonResponse($toolingService->format($generalData + $specificData));
    }
    
    /**

>      * You can define a list of registered services, they will be accessible via the $this->>container->get method, this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     * You can define a list of registered services, they will be accessible via the $this->container->get method, this
```

>      * way of injecting service is interesting if implemented on a base controller class for generic services that

Reviewer: I didn't know about it, it's indeed interesting 👀

Author: Yep it's quite elegant, it's used by the framework without us realizing it

     * may be used by many controllers (like the router, the translator, ...) so you don't need to inject them manually
     * in each controller class.
     * 
     * @return array
     */
    public static function getSubscribedServices(): array
    {

>         return return parent::getSubscribedServices() + [

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        return parent::getSubscribedServices() + [
```

            ToolingService::class => ToolingService::class,
        ];
    }
}
```

**Define your controller as a service**

You can already anticipate and define your controllers as services, it is also compatible with previous versions of Symfony and PrestaShop:

```yaml
services:
  MyNamespace\MyController:
    # Using autowire will inject services in the constructors automatically
    autowire: true
    # Using autoconfigure with controllers that extend AbstractController will handle method parameter injection and subscribed services
    autoconfigure: true

>     # If your controller class doesn't extend AbstractController you should add this tag manually si you benefit from method parameters injection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # If your controller class doesn't extend AbstractController, you should add this tag manually, so you benefit from method parameters injection
```

    tags: ['controller.service_arguments']
```

{{% notice note %}}
**PrestaShopAdminController::getSubscribedServices**

The new base controller class uses the `getSubscribedServices` method to give easy access to some commonly used PrestaShop services, like the `ConfigurationInterface`, `HookDispatcherInterface`, `TranslatorInterface`, ...

> You can see the <a href="https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/blob/develop/src/PrestaShopBundle/Controller/Admin/PrestaShopAdminController.php#L59" target="_blank">full list of subscribed services</a> in the class, this list will probably grow piece by piece but only for common generic services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see the <a href="https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/blob/9.0.0-alpha.1/src/PrestaShopBundle/Controller/Admin/PrestaShopAdminController.php#L59" target="_blank">full list of subscribed services</a> in the class, this list will probably grow piece by piece but only for common generic services.
```

we'll change to v9 final once ready

Author: Yeah that's what I though as well, that's why I used the branch for now But okay for that tag

<br/><br/>

> Thanks to this you can use `$this->container->get(ConfigurationInterface::class)->get('my_config')` to access the configuration service, or alternatively use the helper method `$this->getConfiguration()->get('my_config')`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to this, you can use `$this->container->get(ConfigurationInterface::class)->get('my_config')` to access the configuration service, or alternatively use the helper method `$this->getConfiguration()->get('my_config')`.
```

- [AdminController::isAnonymousAllowed is now public](https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/pull/35810)
- [Login page and authentication migrated](https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/pull/35983)

### Symfony context refacto

> Lots of core code is based on the legacy `Context` class that stores some data as a singleton, but this legacy implementation has many drawbacks so a refactoring was started in PrestaShop 9.0 to replace this usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A significant amount of code in the core relies on the legacy 'Context' class, which stores certain data as a singleton. However, this legacy implementation has many drawbacks, so refactoring was initiated in PrestaShop 9.0 to replace this usage.
```

Author: Ok except for `Context` that should be in backquotes IMHO, as it's a reference to some code

You can find more details about the reason behind this and the implementation in the related <a href="https://github.com/PrestaShop/ADR/blob/master/0024-context-refacto.md" traget="_blank">ADR about Context refactoring</a>.

You should now favor using the modern split context services:

- `PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Context\ApiClientContext`
- `PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Context\CountryContext`
- `PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Context\CurrencyContext`
- `PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Context\EmployeeContext`
- `PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Context\LanguageContext`
- `PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Context\LegacyControllerContext`
- `PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Context\ShopContext`

> We still have some work to do to replace all the usages of the legacy context with the modern ones, but new code will stop using the legacy ones. We recommend developers to rely on the new ones from now on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We still have some work to do to replace all the usages of the legacy context with the modern ones, but the new code will stop using the legacy ones. We recommend that developers rely on the new ones from now on.
```
